Gh-434: Document extending gaffer (#435)
gchq/gaffer-doc: docs/development-guide/extending-gaffer.md

# Extending Gaffer

> Extending Gaffer can mean a few things to a user, this guide aims to cover

Reviewer: I'm not sure we're really targeting users with this guide. Might be better to say developer(s) instead.

general use cases for how and why you may want to extend the capabilities or add
customisation to Gaffer.

## Writing Custom Classes

As Gaffer is Java based to create and load additional libraries you will first

> need to write your custom classes. Now these can be for a range of uses, Gaffer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need to write your custom classes. Gaffer
```

allows for many places to use custom classes such as, custom operations,
aggregation functions, element generators etc.

> Depending on what type of class you are writing e.g. an `Operation` you may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on what type of class you are writing, e.g. an `Operation`, you may
```

> need extend or implement one of the interface classes already in Gaffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to extend or implement one of the interface classes already in Gaffer.
```

> Assuming you are using Maven for package management you can add Gaffer as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assuming you are using Maven for package management, you can add Gaffer as
```

a dependency to gain access to its classes like below:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>uk.gov.gchq.gaffer</groupId>
    <artifactId>${gaffer.component}</artifactId>
    <version>${gaffer.version}</version>
</dependency>
```

!!! tip
    See the [components breakdown](./project-structure/components/components.md)
    for a list of key Gaffer modules.

### Writing an Operation

> In Gaffer we use the term Operation to describe some component of a

Reviewer: Could add a link here to the dev docs page on Operations.

manipulation/query affecting a graph, these are chained together in `OperationChains`

> and this is how we execute manipulations/queries to our graphs. Whilst

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and this is how we execute queries to our graphs. Whilst
```
I don't think manipulations is usually used in the docs so seems strange to introduce a new term.

> there are a wealth of existing operations and their associated handlers that are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
there are a wealth of existing operations and their associated handlers 
```

> provided out of the box with Gaffer; in this section we'll talk about how you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provided out of the box with Gaffer, in this section we'll talk about how you
```

might go about adding a new operation/handler with some simple examples.

#### The Operation Interface

> All Operations in one form or another must adhere to and implement the [`Operation`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/operation/Operation.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All Operations must adhere to and implement the [`Operation`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/operation/Operation.html)
```
Bit wordy

> interface, this interface describes the building blocks an operation must be built from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interface, this interface describes the building blocks of an operation.
```

One important distinction here is that an implementation of `Operation` should not
contain the actual logic for an `Operation`, think of these as a task definition

> or a instruction manual for what an `Operation` should do. This then goes hand in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or an instruction manual for what an `Operation` should do. This then goes hand in
```

> hand with our `OperationHandler`(s) which define the actual functionality

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hand with our `OperationHandler`(s) which define the actual functionality,
```

either generically or split into multiple handlers for different stores.

#### Selecting an Interface

> In general most `Operation` implementations don't actually directly implement the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In general, most `Operation` implementations don't actually directly implement the
```

> `Operation` Interface, they actually implement one or more extended interfaces,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Operation` Interface, they actually implement one or more extended interfaces.
```

> for example the `Input` and `Output` interfaces extend on top of the core `Operation`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example the `Input` and `Output` interfaces extend on top of the core `Operation`
```

interface and concordantly the `InputOutput` interface is a combination of these

> two to be used. These all live inside the Gaffer Core library under the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
two to be used. These all live inside the Gaffer Core library under the
```
The end of this sentence is a bit weird, could be phrased a little clearer than 'two to be used' I think

`Operation` subdirectory (see the [component breakdown](./project-structure/components/operation.md)
for more details).

#### Implementing an Interface

The example we'll use here is the
[`ToSet`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/operation/impl/output/ToSet.html)

> Operation, this will takes an `Iterable` of `Elements` and converts it into a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operation, this takes an `Iterable` of `Elements` and converts it into a
```

`Set`, a handy way to remove duplicate `Elements` if you're doing multiple hops
and end up getting duplicates back.

Taking a look at the [Javadoc](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/operation/impl/output/ToSet.html)

> for this class you should be able to see this class it implements both

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for this class you should be able to see this class implements both
```

> `InputOutput` (with an input type of `Iterable<? extends T>` and an output type

Reviewer 2: It may read better by removing the brackets and just using a comma after `InputOutput`

of `Set<? extends T>` and `MultiInput<T>`). Within the class it also implements
all the requisite methods eg, `shallowClone()`, `setInput()`, `getOptions()`
etc.

#### How to Write the Handler

Using the same `ToSet` Operation from before, now that we have this definition
of an operation, we need to actually tell Gaffer how to do it, we do this by
defining either a single generic `Handler` and linking it to the Operation or in
many cases we might want different implementations based on the store being used
so we'd write a number of operation handlers and decide which one is needed at

> runtime.

Reviewer 2: This is a really long sentence that isn't the clearest so could do with a re-visit.

Here is the [`ToSetHandler`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/store/operation/handler/output/ToSetHandler.html)
which implements the appropriate `Handler` interface (in this case the
`OutputOperationHandler`). It takes in the `ToSet` Operation that has been built
with all the options etc. defined and then does the actual `doOperation()` logic to
stream our Iterable's contents into a `LinkedHashSet`. This and most other
handlers live inside the [Store library](./project-structure/components/store.md).

#### How does Gaffer know which Handler to use?

Handlers are registered in the `Store` class via the `addOpHandlers()` method,
specifically for our example  `addOperationHandler(ToSet.class, new
ToSetHandler<>())` is called to register it. Once this is done we can then
use our `Operation` and its `Handler` in a user defined `OperationChain` to effect

> some manipulation/query on our graph data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
some query on our graph data.
```

You can alternatively use the an operations declarations config file (typically called

> `operationsDeclarations.json`) which can be used to define the Operation and its Handler

Reviewer 2: Should it be `Operation` for consistency with above?

like below:

```json
{
    "operations": [
        {
            "operation": "uk.gov.gchq.gaffer.operation.impl.output.ToSet",
            "handler": {
                "class": "uk.gov.gchq.gaffer.store.operation.handler.output.ToSetHandler"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

### Writing an Element/Object Generator

There are two types of generators that define custom binding for taking a domain
object and transforming it into a Gaffer `Element` for the `ElementGenerator` and

> likewise the reverse with an `ObjectGenerator`.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit odd. May be clearer to just state there are two types then explain what they are rather than try fit it in one confusing sentence.

provide a more nuanced set of interfaces you could choose to use over the core
Element/Object generator interfaces.

As an example we will walk through the one of the existing generators that can
take a Neo4j CSV file and convert the entries to Gaffer `Elements`.

```java
/**
 * An {@link OpenCypherCsvElementGenerator}s that will generate
 * Gaffer Elements from Neo4j CSV strings.
 */
@Since("2.0.0")
@Summary("Generates elements from a Neo4j CSV")
public class Neo4jCsvElementGenerator extends OpenCypherCsvElementGenerator {
    @Override
    protected LinkedHashMap<String, String> getFields() {
        return new Neo4jCsvGenerator().getFields();
    }
}
```

This class may appear very simple but the real functionality for this generator
is in the `OpenCypherCsvElementGenerator` that it extends. This generator is an
abstract class that implements the `ElementGenerator` interface and has a lot of
functionality for handling Open Cypher CSVs.

You can view the [full class in the repository](https://github.com/gchq/Gaffer/blob/develop/core/data/src/main/java/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/data/generator/OpenCypherCsvElementGenerator.java) which has the logic for converting the CSV format

> but the key bit to take note of is the `apply(final Iterable<? extends String>

Reviewer: Line is much longer than the others. Can probably shuffle the text after the link down to the next line.

strings)` method. This method is the main override which will be passed the
lines of a CSV file to convert and return a `Iterable<? extends Element>` e.g. a
list of `Elements`.

This pattern is repeated across many of the different generators and can be used

> as inspiration for your custom generator, as with the Operations so long as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as inspiration for your custom generator. As with the Operations so long as
```

> you're implementing the appropriate interfaces its hard to go far wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you're implementing the appropriate interfaces it's hard to go far wrong.
```
Not sure about the 'far', maybe omit this.

### Writing an Aggregation Function

We can provide a custom aggregation function in a number of ways, most of the
aggregation functionality is provided by the Koryphe library sat adjacent to
Gaffer. If we want to provide a new "generic" aggregator we would add it in this

> Koryphe library, for example lets take a look at the very simple `Max` comparator,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Koryphe library. For example lets take a look at the very simple `Max` comparator,
```

this takes a pair of Java 8 `Comparables` and finds the highest value one, this
function is applied as an aggregation.

```java
@Since("1.0.0")
@Summary("Calculates the max value")
public class Max extends KorypheBinaryOperator<Comparable> {
    @Override
    protected Comparable _apply(final Comparable a, final Comparable b) {
        return a.compareTo(b) >= 0 ? a : b;
    }
}
```

If we want to add something very specific to a store type or some other

> restriction we can add this into the appropriate Store location within Gaffer,

Reviewer 2: Not sure if 'or some other restriction' is needed. I would also change it to a full stop after Gaffer.

> an example of this is the `HyperLogLogPlusAggregator` in the Sketches library,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example of this is the `HyperLogLogPlusAggregator` in the Sketches library,
```

this merges HLLPs together.

```java
@Since("1.0.0")
@Summary("Aggregates HyperLogLogPlus objects")
@Deprecated
public class HyperLogLogPlusAggregator extends KorypheBinaryOperator<HyperLogLogPlus> {
    @Override
    protected HyperLogLogPlus _apply(final HyperLogLogPlus a, final HyperLogLogPlus b) {
        try {
            a.addAll(b);
        } catch (final CardinalityMergeException exception) {
            throw new RuntimeException("An Exception occurred when trying to aggregate the HyperLogLogPlus objects", exception);
        }
        return a;
    }
}
```

There is another way to add aggregators by loading a JAR into Accumulo and
accessing it on the classpath, this is more something an end user customising
their usage of the platform might do rather than a developer. For development
purposes it's preferred to go with the hierarchy of does it belong in Koryphe?
If no, is it store specific or can live inside a library? If no then it could be
loaded into the classpath, as long as it extends a `KorypheBinaryOperator<T>`
then it can be used as an aggregation function for Gaffer.

## Loading Custom Libraries

> Once you have written to make custom classes available the simplest way is to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have written your custom classes to make them available the simplest way is to
```

# Extending Gaffer

Extending Gaffer can mean a few things to a developer, this guide aims to cover
general use cases for how and why you may want to extend the capabilities or add
customisation to Gaffer.

## Writing Custom Classes

As Gaffer is Java based to create and load additional libraries you will first
need to write your custom classes. Gaffer

> allows for many places to use custom classes such as, custom operations,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allows for many places to use custom classes such as custom operations,
```

> need to write your custom classes. Gaffer
> allows for many places to use custom classes such as custom operations,
> aggregation functions, element generators etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to write custom classes. Gaffer has many places where custom classes
can be used, such as custom operations, aggregation functions, element
generators etc.
```

Depending on what type of class you are writing, e.g. an `Operation`, you may
need to extend or implement one of the interface classes already in Gaffer.
Assuming you are using Maven for package management you can add Gaffer as
a dependency to gain access to its classes like below:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>uk.gov.gchq.gaffer</groupId>
    <artifactId>${gaffer.component}</artifactId>
    <version>${gaffer.version}</version>
</dependency>
```

!!! tip
    See the [components breakdown](./project-structure/components/components.md)
    for a list of key Gaffer modules.

### Writing an Operation

In Gaffer we use the term [Operation](./project-structure/components/operation.md)

> to describe some component of a manipulation/query affecting a graph, these are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to describe some component of a query affecting a graph, these are
```

chained together in `OperationChains` and this is how we execute

> manipulations/queries to our graphs. Whilst there are a wealth of existing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
queries to our graphs. Whilst there are a wealth of existing
```

> operations and their associated handlers that are provided out of the box with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operations and their associated handlers provided out of the box with
```

hand with our `OperationHandler`(s) which define the actual functionality,
either generically or split into multiple handlers for different stores.

#### Selecting an Interface

In general, most `Operation` implementations don't actually directly implement the
`Operation` Interface, they actually implement one or more extended interfaces.
For example the `Input` and `Output` interfaces extend on top of the core `Operation`
interface and concordantly the `InputOutput` interface is a combination of these.
These all live inside the Gaffer Core library under the `Operation` subdirectory
(see the [component breakdown](./project-structure/components/operation.md) for
more details).

#### Implementing an Interface

The example we'll use here is the
[`ToSet`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/operation/impl/output/ToSet.html)
Operation, this takes an `Iterable` of `Elements` and converts it into a
`Set`, a handy way to remove duplicate `Elements` if you're doing multiple hops
and end up getting duplicates back.

Taking a look at the [Javadoc](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/operation/impl/output/ToSet.html)

> for this class you should be able to see this class it implements both

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for this class you should be able to see this class implements both
```

        return new Neo4jCsvGenerator().getFields();
    }
}
```

This class may appear very simple but the real functionality for this generator
is in the `OpenCypherCsvElementGenerator` that it extends. This generator is an
abstract class that implements the `ElementGenerator` interface and has a lot of
functionality for handling Open Cypher CSVs.

You can view the [full class in the repository](https://github.com/gchq/Gaffer/blob/develop/core/data/src/main/java/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/data/generator/OpenCypherCsvElementGenerator.java)
which has the logic for converting the CSV format but the key bit to take note
of is the `apply(final Iterable<? extends String> strings)` method. This method
is the main override which will be passed the lines of a CSV file to convert and
return a `Iterable<? extends Element>` e.g. a list of `Elements`.

This pattern is repeated across many of the different generators and can be used
as inspiration for your custom generator. As with the Operations so long as
you're implementing the appropriate interfaces it's hard to go far wrong.

### Writing an Aggregation Function

We can provide a custom aggregation function in a number of ways, most of the

> aggregation functionality is provided by the Koryphe library sat adjacent to

Reviewer: We could add a link to Koryphe.

Gaffer. If we want to provide a new "generic" aggregator we would add it in this
Koryphe library. For example lets take a look at the very simple `Max` comparator,
this takes a pair of Java 8 `Comparables` and finds the highest value one, this
function is applied as an aggregation.

```java
@Since("1.0.0")
@Summary("Calculates the max value")
public class Max extends KorypheBinaryOperator<Comparable> {
    @Override
    protected Comparable _apply(final Comparable a, final Comparable b) {
        return a.compareTo(b) >= 0 ? a : b;
    }
}
```

If we want to add something very specific to a store type or some other

> restriction we can add this into the appropriate Store location within Gaffer,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
restriction we can add this into the appropriate Store location within Gaffer.
```

An example of this is the `HyperLogLogPlusAggregator` in the Sketches library,
this merges HLLPs together.

```java
@Since("1.0.0")
@Summary("Aggregates HyperLogLogPlus objects")
@Deprecated
public class HyperLogLogPlusAggregator extends KorypheBinaryOperator<HyperLogLogPlus> {
    @Override
    protected HyperLogLogPlus _apply(final HyperLogLogPlus a, final HyperLogLogPlus b) {
        try {
            a.addAll(b);
        } catch (final CardinalityMergeException exception) {
            throw new RuntimeException("An Exception occurred when trying to aggregate the HyperLogLogPlus objects", exception);
        }
        return a;
    }
}
```

> There is another way to add aggregators by loading a JAR into Accumulo and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also add aggregators by loading a JAR into Accumulo and
```

> accessing it on the classpath, this is more something an end user customising

Reviewer: Not sure about use of 'end user' here. This sentence is referring to someone who is deploying an instance of Gaffer.  For consistency with the rest of the docs, it might be good to mention 'administrator'. User has been used to describe someone who runs queries and not someone who installs Gaffer.

their usage of the platform might do rather than a developer. For development
purposes it's preferred to go with the hierarchy of does it belong in Koryphe?

> If no, is it store specific or can live inside a library? If no then it could be

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this. I think the point being made is that some functions might be better placed in Koryphe. This doesn't make much sense for an external developer who probably isn't looking to make contributions to Koryphe.
